Add a first version of the docs (#43)
we-like-parsers/pegen: docs/grammar.rst

.. _e1-e2-1:

``e1 | e2``
~~~~~~~~~~~

Match e1 or e2.

The first alternative can also appear on the line after the rule name
for formatting purposes. In that case, a \| must be used before the
first alternative, like so:

::

       rule_name[return_type]:
           | first_alt
           | second_alt

``( e )``
~~~~~~~~~

Match e.

::

       rule_name: (e)

A slightly more complex and useful example includes using the grouping
operator together with the repeat operators:

::

       rule_name: (e1 e2)*

``[ e ] or e?``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Optionally match e.

::

       rule_name: [e]

A more useful example includes defining that a trailing comma is
optional:

::

       rule_name: e (',' e)* [',']

.. _e-1:

``e*``
~~~~~~

Match zero or more occurrences of e.

::

       rule_name: (e1 e2)*

.. _e-2:

``e+``
~~~~~~

Match one or more occurrences of e.

::

       rule_name: (e1 e2)+

``s.e+``
~~~~~~~~

Match one or more occurrences of e, separated by s. The generated parse
tree does not include the separator. This is otherwise identical to
``(e (s e)*)``.

::

       rule_name: ','.e+

.. _e-3:

``&e``
~~~~~~

Succeed if e can be parsed, without consuming any input.

> 

Reviewer: One thing missing here, and in much documentation of pegen that I've seen (PEP etc.), is what `&&` means. It's used a bunch in cpython and data's `python.gram`.

Hmm, but somehow it's documented in `grammar.md`. Should that redundant file be removed?

(I tried to look for other such undocumented symbols, but I don't see any.)

Author: > , is what `&&` means. It

Ah, excellent point. This was the only grammar element that was added **after** the PEP. I will make sure to add it there.

> Hmm, but somehow it's documented in `grammar.md`. Should that redundant file be removed?

Indeed, I will merge these two files.

Author: I pushed a change merging both files

Reviewer: Great! Some important other additions here, like documenting `LOCATIONS`, `@class`, and `@subheader`.  I added a few specific comments to [the commit](https://github.com/we-like-parsers/pegen/commit/0328de304e19fd931726d213fbc88b5a2e1dab68).

.. _e-4:

``!e``
~~~~~~

Fail if e can be parsed, without consuming any input.

An example taken from the Python grammar specifies that a primary
consists of an atom, which is not followed by a ``.`` or a ``(`` or a
``[``:

::

       primary: atom !'.' !'(' !'['

``~``
~~~~~

Commit to the current alternative, even if it fails to parse.

::

       rule_name: '(' ~ some_rule ')' | some_alt

In this example, if a left parenthesis is parsed, then the other
alternative won’t be considered, even if some_rule or ‘)’ fail to be
parsed.

Left recursion
--------------

PEG parsers normally do not support left recursion but Pegen implements
a technique that allows left recursion using the memoization cache. This
allows us to write not only simple left-recursive rules but also more
complicated rules that involve indirect left-recursion like

::

     rule1: rule2 | 'a'
     rule2: rule3 | 'b'
     rule3: rule1 | 'c'

and “hidden left-recursion” like::

> ::

Reviewer: This doesn't render correctly (two `::`s).

     rule: 'optional'? rule '@' some_other_rule

Variables in the Grammar
------------------------

A sub-expression can be named by preceding it with an identifier and an
``=`` sign. The name can then be used in the action (see below), like
this: ::

> ::

Reviewer: Ditto here.

       rule_name[return_type]: '(' a=some_other_rule ')' { a }

Grammar actions
---------------

To avoid the intermediate steps that obscure the relationship between
the grammar and the AST generation the PEG parser allows directly
generating AST nodes for a rule via grammar actions. Grammar actions are
language-specific expressions that are evaluated when a grammar rule is
successfully parsed. These expressions can be written in Python. As an
example of a grammar with Python actions, the piece of the parser
generator that parses grammar files is bootstrapped from a meta-grammar
file with Python actions that generate the grammar tree as a result of
the parsing.

In the specific case of the PEG grammar for Python, having actions
allows directly describing how the AST is composed in the grammar
itself, making it more clear and maintainable. This AST generation
process is supported by the use of some helper functions that factor out
common AST object manipulations and some other required operations that
are not directly related to the grammar.

To indicate these actions each alternative can be followed by the action
code inside curly-braces, which specifies the return value of the

> alternative

Reviewer: One thing that confused me at first, so could use documentation here, is that the thing in braces must be a Python expression; it can't be multiple lines of Python code.  This is sort of implied by it being `return`ed, but I think it would help to be explicit. Another possible interpretation (and possibly a useful feature in the future) would be to allow multiple statements which include a `return`.

Also missing a period.

Reviewer: I think this comment is the only one remaining.  Here's a possible wording:

```
To indicate these actions, each alternative can be followed by an action
inside curly-braces, which specifies a Python expression to be evaluated
and returned for the alternative:
```

::

       rule_name[return_type]:
           | first_alt1 first_alt2 { first_alt1 }
           | second_alt1 second_alt2 { second_alt1 }

> If the action is ommited, a default action is generated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the action is omitted, a default action is generated:
```

-  If there’s a single name in the rule in the rule, it gets returned.

-  If there is more than one name in the rule, a collection with all
   parsed expressions gets returned.

This default behaviour is primarily made for very simple situations and

> for debugging pourposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for debugging purposes.
```

A subexpression can be named by preceding it with an identifier and an
``=`` sign. The name can then be used in the action, like this:

::

   rule_name[return_type]: '(' a=some_other_rule ')' { a }

Grammar actions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To avoid the intermediate steps that obscure the relationship between
the grammar and the AST generation the PEG parser allows directly
generating AST nodes for a rule via grammar actions. Grammar actions are
language-specific expressions that are evaluated when a grammar rule is
successfully parsed. These expressions can be written in Python. As an
example of a grammar with Python actions, the piece of the parser
generator that parses grammar files is bootstrapped from a meta-grammar
file with Python actions that generate the grammar tree as a result of
the parsing.

In the specific case of the PEG grammar for Python, having actions
allows directly describing how the AST is composed in the grammar
itself, making it more clear and maintainable. This AST generation
process is supported by the use of some helper functions that factor out
common AST object manipulations and some other required operations that
are not directly related to the grammar.

> To indicate these actions each alternative can be followed by the action
> code inside curly-braces, which specifies the return value of the
> alternative:

Author: ```suggestion
To indicate these actions, each alternative can be followed by an action
inside curly-braces, which specifies a Python expression to be evaluated
and returned for the alternative:
```
